content/posts/code-newbie.md, before:

---
title: "Code Newbie Podcast"
date: 2015-03-19 12:01:27
draft: false
img: 'code-new.jpg'
---

## Overview
The [Code Newbie](http://www.codenewbie.org) website and community are priceless
tools for beginners.  They offer several resources to help you along your
programming journey.

My favorite of these resources is the podcast.  The interviewer and founder of
Code Newbie, [Saron Yitbarek](https://twitter.com/saronyitbarek), does an
absolutley fantastic job at keeping the podcast organic as well as informative.

There are plenty of podcasts I listen to that forget that not all listeners can
keep up with pacing and terminology.  Saron does a tremendous job of having
herself and guests re-clarify  things when they start to get abstract. Even the
tone of her voice is very calm and reassuring which I think rubs off on the guests
and allows them to be very natural during the interview.


## Subject Matter
The shows them selves each feature one guest and range from subjects like...

- [Getting a job in the field](http://www.codenewbie.org/podcast/autotune-inclusivity-and-getting-a-job)
- [Speaking in front of an audience](http://www.codenewbie.org/podcast/ep-5-speaking-of-speaking)
- [Mother Coders](http://www.codenewbie.org/podcast/mother-coders)
- [Accessibility](http://www.codenewbie.org/podcast/accessibility)

This month Code Newbie is teaming up with another one of my favorite podcasts
[Hansel Minutes](http://hanselminutes.com/) and doing March is for Makers.  Each
podcasts in the month of March involve hardware, and both shows have had really
good content so far.

## Bottom Line
You do not have to be a beginner to appreciate all of the amazing things
[Code Newbie](http://www.codenewbie.org) has to  offer. Go head over to the
website now and become part of a wonderful community.

Commit message:

add title and desc header data to every page

content/posts/code-newbie.md, after:

---
title: "Code Newbie Podcast"
description: "A brief overview of the Code Newbies organization. A community of teachers and programers sharing resources."
date: 2015-03-19 12:01:27
draft: false
img: 'code-new.jpg'
imgAlt: "A old page screen shot of the Code Newbies website's landing page."
---

## Overview
The [Code Newbie](http://www.codenewbie.org) website and community are priceless
tools for beginners.  They offer several resources to help you along your
programming journey.

My favorite of these resources is the podcast.  The interviewer and founder of
Code Newbie, [Saron Yitbarek](https://twitter.com/saronyitbarek), does an
absolutley fantastic job at keeping the podcast organic as well as informative.

There are plenty of podcasts I listen to that forget that not all listeners can
keep up with pacing and terminology.  Saron does a tremendous job of having
herself and guests re-clarify  things when they start to get abstract. Even the
tone of her voice is very calm and reassuring which I think rubs off on the guests
and allows them to be very natural during the interview.


## Subject Matter
The shows them selves each feature one guest and range from subjects like...

- [Getting a job in the field](http://www.codenewbie.org/podcast/autotune-inclusivity-and-getting-a-job)
- [Speaking in front of an audience](http://www.codenewbie.org/podcast/ep-5-speaking-of-speaking)
- [Mother Coders](http://www.codenewbie.org/podcast/mother-coders)
- [Accessibility](http://www.codenewbie.org/podcast/accessibility)

This month Code Newbie is teaming up with another one of my favorite podcasts
[Hansel Minutes](http://hanselminutes.com/) and doing March is for Makers.  Each
podcasts in the month of March involve hardware, and both shows have had really
good content so far.

## Bottom Line
You do not have to be a beginner to appreciate all of the amazing things
[Code Newbie](http://www.codenewbie.org) has to  offer. Go head over to the
website now and become part of a wonderful community.
